[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hey, I'm Ashleigh Sergeant,
and welcome to "Everyday
Enlightenment," your go-to
show for tips on how to be more
conscious in the midst
of your busy modern life.
In our modern age, the
desire for self-improvement
has made its way far beyond the
desire to be physically fit.
Whether we realize it or
not, many of our actions
are driven by the belief that
getting more of what we think
we want--
like money, power, love--
from others will
actually be what
makes us happy, when, in fact,
learning to be present with
and to love our life
more fully is truly
the key to finding joy.
My guest today is a scholar
of classical Tantra.
Tantra is oftentimes
misunderstood
as being a sexual
practice, when, in fact,
the traditional
teachings of Tantra
show that building an intimate
relationship with oneself
is truly the most profound
pathway to lasting joy
and happiness.
Christopher Wallis,
also known as Hareesh,
has spent over 30 years
studying this ancient practice.
Hareesh, thank you
for being here today.
>> Thank you.
>> Glad to talk
about this with you.
I think this is a really
pertinent conversation.
At least in the kind of
yoga meditation communities,
the practice of
Tantra has started
to have a little bit
of a resurgence as one
of these practices,
or one of these very--
sometimes really elaborate,
ritual-based practices
that promises to
really help people
live these very
pleasure-filled lives.
And I think we need a little
bit of clarity around it.
>> Yeah.
And really, there's
so many ideas and so
many misunderstandings
about Tantra.
And I would just say,
in the simplest sense,
what it actually
is and always was
is a technology for
self-realization
and for empowerment.
So becoming empowered
to find your center,
to experience joy in the
details of everyday life,
not by transcending or
escaping everyday life.
Discovering greater and
greater beauty and connection
in everyday life.
That's what it's
really all about.
And so it's always been
a system of practice
aimed at that for people
who are living in the world.
So it's specifically
the yoga that
was designed for people with
jobs, families, and so on, as
opposed to renunciates living
in monasteries or caves.
>> Yeah.
And can you elaborate
a little bit
on the concept of it being a
technology and what that means
in the modern world, where
we associate technology
as digital technology?
>> Yeah.
I could just call it
a system of practices.
But it is, in a sense, a
technology in the sense
that there are just this
huge array of practices
that work on and with
all the different layers
of our embodied experience.
So in that sense, it's just
an incredibly rich tradition.
So there's practices relating to
the body, relating to the mind,
relating to the
imagination, relating
to the faculty of attention,
relating to the breath.
And all of these
together, sometimes
working with all of these at
the same time, or separately.
And so, in this way,
with these practices,
we actually can start to
have a more and more holistic
experience of life where
we're no longer feeling
so much separated or torn, but
rather are integrated and whole
and responding to the whole
of each present moment
with the whole of our being
in a kind of organic flow
that has a quality of ease
and lightness and joy,
even when you're
negotiating challenges.
That's the idea
behind the practice.
>> Well, we see these self-help
books and promises of things
of live in the present
moment, and be present,
and all of these promises, which
seem to have some serious roots
in the practice of Tantra.
Of simply-- which is
not so simple at all--
actually cultivating this
awareness in all that we do.
So how do you think
this got so misconstrued
in the modern world where we
relate the concept of Tantra
with these elaborate
sexual rituals?
>> Well, that's a long story.
There's actually
quite a few scholars
working on that
very issue, what's
called the mediation or
transmission of Tantra
to the West over
the last 120 years,
and how it's resulted in a
variety of misunderstandings.
The biggest one being that most
people, when they hear the word
Tantra, think it's,
if not sexual,
at least it's an
intimacy practice.
It's a partner practice.
And original Tantra was
primarily not a partner
practice, except in certain
specialized contexts.
Rather, it's a
practice that you do
to become more fully
intimate with yourself,
because that is the
prerequisite for greater
and more authentic
intimacy with anyone else.
>> And anything else.
>> And anything else, exactly.
With your whole life.
And so the main problem being
that we're not fully aware
of ourselves, in a sense.
So instead of being
present, I like
to say, paying attention to
the whole of your experience,
that that's what they're
really talking about.
Because you're always present.
If you're thinking about
the past or future,
you're doing it in the present.
But you can get lost in thought
and abstracted from the whole
of your experience.
Whereas when you're
paying attention
to the whole of your
experience, and softening
into an awareness of
all the subtle details
of your experience,
then intuitive insights
can arise that are otherwise
impossible if you're
lost in a mental
construct about your life
and yourself and other people.
>> Can you give us
an example of that?
Of what you said--
opening to the totality
of your experience?
>> Yeah, absolutely.
So there's a form of
meditation in Tantra,
in Tantric yoga, that it's
not about transcending.
It's not about abstracting.
It's not even about
witnessing, exactly.
It's about--
>> Or stopping the mind?
>> Right, it's not
about stopping the mind.
It's rather melting
your awareness
into a holistic
encompassing embrace
of the totality of the moment.
So you actually slow down a bit.
You breathe a bit more.
You open up.
And you're just gently
aware of everything.
Where you're aware
of the thoughts
that are arising and
subsiding, but not
any more so than you're
aware of anything else.
Whether it's bird chirps.
Whether it's the feeling
of having a body.
Whether it's the temperature
of the air on your skin.
You're just aware of all of
it simultaneously and equally.
And in this way, you
start to cultivate
a sense of the oneness that
actually already is the case.
It's just that we think
ourselves out of oneness,
when it's really
our natural state.
>> And that seems to be a really
powerful anecdote to this major
misconception that we have
in our modern culture,
which is this desire to get more
of what we think we want will
make us happy.
>> Yeah.
And what's interesting
is Tantra honors desire
instead of other spiritual
paths and other forms of yoga
that kind of demonize it.
But it's really
interesting, because it
says, hey, desire is OK.
Desire whatever you
want, and you can try
to fulfill all those desires.
Just don't fall into
the trap of thinking
that getting what you want
is the path to happiness.
Because actually
loving what is--
the whole of what is,
including your desires--
is the path to happiness.
So when you love
what is, you can
enjoy the feeling
of having a desire
whether or not it
gets satisfied.
And that's a totally
different paradigm, actually.
>> It's one of the most
beautiful things that really
resonated for me when I started
getting deeper into my study
of Tantra, which is this
true practice of self-love.
And not on a
superficial, like, oh, I
love myself, or from an ego
space, necessarily, at all.
But more of this
embracing and welcoming
back all of the parts of ourself
that we may have cast aside.
Oh, I have this terrible habit
from my mother or something,
and I need to just
get rid of it.
And all of these
parts of ourself
that we have kind of
almost created fragments
and tried to push away
in order to be better.
>> And I can tell you really got
it because you articulated it
so well just now.
So beautifully.
And just to add one little
piece is that what we do
is we sort of, especially
in spirituality,
we create an idealized
image of ourself.
And then everything
that doesn't fit
the idealized
image, as you said,
gets suppressed or
denied in some way.
And so this self-love, it's
this actually welcoming back
all those parts of yourself,
and letting them integrate,
and realizing it's absolutely
OK to feel whatever I feel.
And even to think
whatever I think.
I don't need to place
so much significance
on this twisted spiritual idea
of thinking the right things.
Only thinking positive thoughts.
>> Right.
>> That's a lack
of self-acceptance.
And if I have a lack
of self-acceptance
when it comes to
relationship with others,
there's also going
to be a problem,
because I'm going to push
the idealized image of me.
And instead of
being just totally
honest and intimate
with what is,
which is how humans connect--
sometimes it's uncomfortable,
and sometimes it's comfortable.
But if we don't
connect over what is,
we're not really
connecting at all
except with these mind-projected
images of ourselves.
Which is not fulfilling.
>> And we set standards that
we just will never reach.
For example, stopping my mind,
or never having a negative
thought.
Those are just not
going to ever go away.
It's not realistic.
We can actually start to
address a piece of ourself
and say, like, aw, thank you
for trying to protect me.
And for me, that was a
really beautiful example
of what it means to be
intimate with oneself.
>> Yeah.
And the thing that comes up for
some people when they consider
this teaching about
unconditional positive
self-regard or self-love
is they get worried.
Well, wait a second.
Am I going to get
overly indulgent
with myself, or permissive,
or something like that?
And actually, what happens is,
if you truly are practicing
radical self-acceptance, and you
feel into what's inside of you,
you realize that,
at a certain point,
certain things are
ready to fall away.
So instead of needing to
demonize a habit-- oh,
that's bad, I need
to stop that--
you just do this
radical self-acceptance.
And then you realize if
you have love for yourself,
then naturally less
healthy habits fall away.
And you can literally feel,
oh, yeah, that's ready to go.
Whereas when you had
the negative self-image,
you kept the unhealthy habit
to reinforce your self-image.
Because the ego would rather
be right than happy every time.
>> Right.
>> Yeah.
>> Do you want to talk
about the ego a little bit?
>> Yeah.
In many spiritual communities,
the ego is demonized.
And there's a lot
of misunderstanding,
because the ego is not
really a thing, per se.
It's not an entity.
It's just the collection
of all your self-images.
So everything you would put
after the phrase "I am."
I am this kind of person,
not that kind of person.
And the reason
it's problematic is
that when we're invested
in our self-images,
we end up defending them tooth
and nail against all comers.
And we're super invested
in others seeing us
as we see ourselves.
And so that gets in the way
of real human connection,
because self-images
are not where it's at.
All of us contain the full
potential of human beings,
of humanity.
We all feel, if
we let ourselves,
the full range of
human emotions,
and have the full range
of human experiences.
And we all have the potential
to be a saint or a killer
and everything in between.
And so we're much
fuller as beings
than we let ourselves believe.
And so the more we cling to and
invest in these self-images,
the more we artificially
limit ourselves
and don't allow ourselves
to feel whatever
we feel that's not
necessarily in alignment
with the self-image.
So it's a much fuller
experience of life,
a more alive experience of life,
when you become more and more
free of self-images.
And then you're also
arguing with others less,
because there's less
to defend and justify.
So the ego is problematic.
But it's nothing but a
series of persistent thoughts
about yourself.
So when you disinvest--
if that's the right
word-- from that,
then there's just naturally
this greater sense
of freedom and ease and flow.
>> Well, would you be open
to sharing with us a couple
of really practical tips that we
can do any time to help to tap
into this state of
fullness that really is,
as we're talking about, our
underlying true state of being?
>> Yeah, absolutely.
So the practice or tip that
I want to share with you
is a kind of emotional
self-care, which is sadly all
too rare in our society.
And I call it
digestion practice,
meaning you're learning
to fully digest
your emotions and your
experiences of the day.
So it's very simple.
Sometime towards the end of the
day, before you're too tired,
you can put yourself
in a restorative pose,
if you've ever done
restorative yoga.
And you can put your
hands on your own body.
And you can notice
what emotions are still
lingering from your
day that didn't get
fully digested or assimilated.
And maybe there
was a moment where
you felt hurt or
upset by something,
but you didn't have a
moment to process it.
Or maybe there
was a moment where
you were excited or
overjoyed by something,
but you didn't have
time to celebrate it.
And so you just
get in touch with,
for five or 10 minutes
towards the end of the day,
getting in touch
with whatever in
you wasn't fully felt,
or didn't get a chance
to be fully felt from that day.
And then you just let yourself
fully feel it, and let
the emotion naturally
dissolve or move through
without pushing it or
manipulating it in any way.
And with practice, this
becomes such a nourishing thing
to do that you wonder how did I
ever even survive without this.
And you're able to not carry
so much baggage from one day
into the next when you're
doing this digestion practice.
The second practice or tip
that I want to share with you
is traditionally called feeding
the goddesses of the senses.
And it's a beautiful practice.
And it's one in which we
are able to actually express
our love and care for ourselves.
So in this practice,
very simply,
for about five
minutes every day,
you nourish one of your
senses with beauty.
Whether that means meditating
on a beautiful piece of music,
whether that means totally
diving into the experience
of a taste of delicious food
and focusing on nothing but that
for five or 10 minutes.
Or even a smell or a
sensation of touch.
Any of the senses can be
nourished in this way.
And you say, oh, that sounds
like a great homework.
I totally want to do that.
But the thing is
to actually make
it a discipline
where you actually
commit to nourishing one
or more of the senses
for five or 10 minutes
every single day.
And in this way, the more
we care for our senses,
which naturally long for
these experiences of beauty
and presence, then
we start to feel
more and more that overflows
into the rest of our day.
We notice beauty
where we weren't
able to notice it
before when we're
doing this practice
of nourishing
the senses with beauty.
So it's an actual yogic
practice of Tantric yoga, which
is more open to exploring
the senses and sensuality
than other forms of yoga.
Which is part of
how it developed
some of the misunderstandings
that indeed circulate about it.
So a lot of people
think they don't
have time for a dedicated
spiritual practice.
I would have to sit for
an hour every morning.
Actually, it's
even more powerful
if you take five
minutes here and there
throughout your day, maybe two
or three or even four times,
to do one of these
practices, or one or more.
And in that way, when you
weave awareness and awareness
cultivation into
your everyday life,
it has a more powerful
impact than if you
have a spiritual
practice that's separated
from the rest of your life.
So I encourage you to
explore the way in which you
can interweave that which you
love and that which you value,
and care for yourself,
and accessing
your center into the fabric
of your everyday life
in all the nooks and crannies
that are available to you
throughout that
tapestry of life.
>> So great.
Thank you so much.
I love the way you
articulate everything.
And it's so important to
be able to even just get
some space between the
busyness of our days.
And you articulate
it so beautifully
and make it so clear.
Thanks for being here.
>> Yeah, it's
wonderful to be here.
Thank you.
>> Yeah.
Thank you for joining us for
"Everyday Enlightenment."
Until next time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]